---
layout: post
title:  "Notes from IETF 121"
date:   2024-11-24 12:14:00 +0000
categories: ietf
---
Author: Colin Perkins

I recently attended the  [IETF 121](https://datatracker.ietf.org/meeting/121/proceedings)
meeting, that was held in Dublin from 2-8 November 2024. While there, I
worked to help charter new IRTF research groups on sustainability and the
Internet, and on deep-space networking, helped to support initiatives to
improve IETF mailing list moderation and finalise an IRTF code of conduct,
and even engaged with some technical work!

<img src="/assets/images/IMG_1428.jpg" width=25% style="float:right">

A major focus of the meeting was discussing and planning for the potential
IRTF **Sustainability and the Internet research group**. With the recent
creation of of the GREEN Working Group in the IETF – [chartered to
consider](https://www.ietf.org/blog/green-wg/) use cases, requirements, and
solutions for energy efficiency metrics, monitoring and controlling energy
consumption of network devices, and optimising energy efficiency – it’s
time to think what are the longer-term activities where the IRTF can
usefully contribute. 

The discussion was both spirited and useful, both in email and in-person
during the meeting in Dublin – thank you to all who participated! The
proposed charter for the group has seen some extensive revisions, and now
considers to characterise and reduce the Internet’s footprint to ensure it
is environmentally, socially, and economically sustainable, from a systems
perspective; to explore the role of policy in ensuring sustainability as a
complement to technical measures; to explore strategies for managing
Jevon’s paradox to ensure sustained carbon footprint reduction; and to
appraise new methodologies, architectures and strategies to ensure Internet
resilience in the face of climate change.

Discussion is ongoing  to refine the proposed charter to ensure the work is
focussed and to make clear the relationship with the IETF GREEN WG and the
IAB e-impact programme, but things are moving strongly in the right
direction thanks to the tireless work of the three proponents – Ali Rezaki,
Eve Schooler, and Michael Welzl. I hope that we’ll be able to charter the
group in the coming weeks, in time for the next IETF and IRTF meetings in
March 2025.

![image](/assets/images/IMG_1442.jpg)

Also under discussion in Dublin was a potential **SPACE research group**.
This again complements an IETF activity, in this case the DEEPSPACE BoF,
and is considering the challenges in extending the Internet to cislunar
environments, to support plans by NASA and others to return to the Moon in
coming years, and to potentially extend the use of the Internet protocols
out to deep space environments. This work is less mature than the
sustainability research group, and there’s a need to carefully scope both
this activity and any IETF standards activity that emerges, but it’s
interesting to consider research focussed on supporting space science and
exploration, distinct from the ever-increasing commercial rush to build LEO
satellite mega-constellations.

In addition to these potential new research groups, the IETF and IRTF are
both making progress with their ongoing efforts to enhance diversity and
bring in new people from a wider range of backgrounds and countries. The
IETF Moderation Procedures Working Group, that’s working to update the
processes and guidelines for mailing list moderation practices, had a
successful first meeting and in the IRTF we made good progress on
finalising the new Code of Conduct. 

Due to the generosity of the diversity travel grant sponsors, we were also
able to bring in new participants, and to support ongoing engagement, for a
number of people from under-represented groups and parts of the world.

![image](/assets/images/travelgrants-121.png)

At the time of this writing, applications are being accepted for travel
grants to attend IRTF events co-located with the upcoming IETF 122 meeting
in Bangkok, in March 2025.

Technical work? There was plenty of that, of course! On the research side,
my post-doc, Ryo Yanagida, gave a great presentation in the Research and
Analysis of Standards-setting Processes Research Group (RASPRG) reviewing
some of the recent work we’ve done on characterising the IETF standards
process, as part of a broader meeting that also included a nice study of
the impact of meeting location on participation in 3GPP and IETF.

In the IETF, the Standard Communication with Network Elements (SCONE)
working group is starting to developing an interface for cooperation
between the network and media applications to help optimise use quality of
experience, and the media over QUIC working group is developing interesting
new named-data approaches to media delivery – both topics that potentially
align with my interests.


